Minutes 2023-11-15 (#597)
solid/specification: meetings/2023-11-15.md

* eP: What are the best next steps for this? Wait for working group? start discussing now?
* PAC: I don't think we should wait for the WG. The main reason being that if WG is not chartered to work on that topic it will not pick it up. Given the number of depencencies, including the access control, especially the insufficient maturity level of those specifications. It is worthwhile to have this conversation before the working group starts. We should be clear what to include in the charter.
* eP: I would propose that we coordinate a special topic meeting to discuss this further
* ...: should we write something down first and then have the meeting?
* AC: If you plan a meeting I will arrange to attend it. Outlining some of the specific details would be helpful to focus the conversation.

ACTION: eP will expand on the [related issue](https://github.com/solid/specification/discussions/555) and will propose a date

### W3C Solid WG Charter Proposal
URL: https://github.com/solid/solid-wg-charter

* PA: We received a [review](https://github.com/w3c/strategy/issues/377) from the TAG, which echo some remarks from the AC review.

> * ...: I don't know why we didn't get this review earlier, before sending it out to AC.

Reviewer: @pchampin , back in March (2023-03-22) I've requested for a TAG review *prior to* AC review in https://github.com/solid/solid-wg-charter/issues/15 :

>As part of horizontal review, review from TAG should be requested to improve the charter prior to going to Members.

This topic was also on the CG agenda at least 4 times: https://github.com/search?q=repo%3Asolid%2Fspecification%20path%3A%2F%5Emeetings%5C%2F%2F%20https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fsolid%2Fsolid-wg-charter%2Fissues%2F15&type=code and undoubtedly mentioned numerous times.

So, I know you/we've acknowledged and discussed this issue.

Why did we go to AC review without TAG review? Who made the call?

---

I would also add that every single one of the other points/considerations I've raised in that issue are literally the feedback we've received through AC reviews.

Please let me know if/how I can be of better service.

Reviewer 2: > Why did we go to AC review without TAG review? Who made the call?

I request horizontal reviews on the charter back in June (see timeline of [this issue](https://github.com/w3c/strategy/issues/377#issue-1642474342)). Some groups responded, others (including the TAG) didn't). It is generally agreed that we can "timeout" on horizontal reviews, in order to keep things going.

In retrospect, I should have chased up the TAG in order to get their review... :disappointed:

* ...: Now we are in a strang situation, where what we need to do now is go to the council and _not_ try to resolve existing issues
* ...: Instead, we should start over with the charter and then go back to the AC with the new charter
* ...: New idea for the charter: current charter is focused on one part of Solid (client-server protocol), but Solid is much larger than this, including social aspects (client specs, etc). Those social aspects were brought forward in the AC review: trying to solve a very large problem
* ...: The idea -- reducing the scope to just client to server protocol, leaving aside all the ambitions of building a decentralized web. That's the long term goal
* ...: What about LDP 2.0: adding access control and authentication
* ...: making this a successor of LDP would make this less about this being a special way to solve very large problems
* ...: This also would address the criticism that we are extending something existing rather than specifying something particular from Inrupt
* eP: This seems like a pragmatic approach to consider. There has been movement to make Solid _not_ a direct successor of LDP

> * ...: A good step might be to document that prior work and how Solid differs from LDP

Reviewer: @elf-pavlik :

Along the lines of https://solidproject.org/ED/protocol#relationship-to-ldp .. https://github.com/solid/specification/issues/224 ? I am well-aware that there is more to the story.

On 2023-07-03, I wrote the following for that section introducing Solid Protocol's relationship to LDP: https://github.com/solid/specification/pull/539#issue-1785904650

>It is intended to help W3C horizontal reviewers ( e.g., https://github.com/solid/solid-wg-charter/issues/15 ) as well as anyone already familiar with either Solid Protocol or LDP (or both) to understand where they come together or diverge.

See also https://github.com/solid/specification/pull/597/files#r1394432591

/cc @pchampin

Reviewer 2: My understanding (still after re-reading the "Relationship to LDP" section) is that Solid storage servers are complying LDP servers, with some additional restrictions that Solid clients can rely upon. Such restrictions have been introduced by the Solid community for good reasons, so they could be considered either as
* improvements over LDP 1.0, that all LDP 2.0 servers should comply with, or
* a specific profile of LDP which could be specified (but not necessarily required) in LDP 2.0.

Reviewer: My last comment on this PR :) We should continue elsewhere.

---

> * improvements over LDP 1.0, that all LDP 2.0 servers should comply with, or

You know.. this is hard. And will take a dedicated Group to do just that. And LDP Next CG would've been the place. Perhaps it could be reopened if there is new interest.

>* a specific profile of LDP which could be specified (but not necessarily required) in LDP 2.0.

I think this would've been good to defer to the [LDP Next CG](https://www.w3.org/groups/cg/ldpnext) for anything that would resemble LDP 2.0, as opposed to Solid Protocol. This is why I proposed to add LDP Next as one of the groups to coordinate with in the WG charter ( https://github.com/solid/solid-wg-charter/pull/12/files#diff-338e19e28f599d3bc3f239af866c9bf1fdcdfdb2e35d7806baffb4bc1ce7ea5bR410-R411 )... and follow-up with the LDP Next CG at the time: https://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/public-ldpnext/2023Mar/0003.html ... but unfortunately the group recently closed (2023-10-16) : https://www.w3.org/groups/cg/ldpnext/ . This is tiring. I mean.. again, there is even https://fcrepo.github.io/fcrepo-specification/ based off LDP too (and even using/referring to Solid stuff like WAC and LDN.)

I (we?) know that LDP 1.0 doesn't cut it for Solid. We understood that ago, and it only technically / explicitly borrowed some parts. We tried not to introduce any conflicts though. Neither LDP or the Solid Protocol doesn't quite cut it when it comes to utterly simple, and by far the most dominant use case out there e.g., a homepage / a representation of some sort to express an identity (no, I don't mean WebID) / aboutness / general index on the root container (root URL path with /). LDP and Solid Protocol doesn't / clearly explain that out of the box (yet). We needed more implementation experience. In the case of LDP, that wasn't even really taken into account as a UC, AFAIK. In the case of Solid Protocol, some folks seemed to have HTMLphobia and well, we got caught up with conflation of personal preferences with needs and technical feasibility. I've lost track of the number of times where I said: we will not get Solid adopted / or lose a lot of people, if we don't show a clear path on how people can publish/manage something like a homepage using the Solid Protocol consistently, just as with any other resource. And, no, a homepage is not an application for the most widest use - It doesn't not require JavaScript to be human-readable/accessible. That said, I'm confident that this can be resolved.

Any way, the [Solid Protocol Server](https://solidproject.org/ED/protocol#Server) would *generally* be compatible with LDP Server ( https://www.w3.org/TR/ldp/#terms ) - as far as the role is concerned based on HTTP server - but none of the major LDP requirements besides some behaviours related to basic containment. (I don't wish to dive into those details here. As mentioned in the PR that introduced the section, that can all be spelled out further (brief mentions in https://solidproject.org/ED/protocol#server-basic-container and protecting containment statements etc..) Don't get me wrong, there is high overlap and it is relatively easy to extend an implementation conforming to an LDP server to conform to a SP server.

Reviewer 3: @csarven I find your anecdotal case against LDP vague and unconvincing.  Especially as homepage is nowhere mentioned in the charter or your spec, indeed neither is HTML.  I suspect you are lobbying for your minority view position of using RDFa + XHTML.  Conversations in the WebID CG lead me to suspect that will be removed from WebID in favour of JSON-LD.  @elf-pavlik is correct, this should go in a new issue in the charter repo.  There is a path to standardize LDP 2.0 as the basis of Solid 1.0.  Let's examine the options in a proper github issue.

Reviewer: Hey @melvincarvalho , nice to see you here. How are things? What you wrote is mega deep, true, and insightful. You should run for chair or table.

Reviewer 3: > Hey @melvincarvalho , nice to see you here. How are things? What you wrote is mega deep, true, and insightful. You should run for chair or table.

@csarven this is completely inappropriate

Reviewer: Melvin, please seek my confirmation instead of assuming and sharing your unsolicited speculations and claims regarding my lobbying. Just a hint: you're completely mistaken.

Furthermore, you don't have consent to speak on behalf of or represent the views of the Solid CG (and the WebID CG).

Once more, I encourage you to review the Solid CG's [communication guidelines](https://github.com/solid/specification/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md#communication).

Reviewer 3: @csarven this is completely inappropriate.

* ...: Then would it be reasonable to call it LDP 2.0
* HZ: this proposal would make solid completely different as it takes away the operational aspect of Solid
* PA: the goal is not to reduce Solid to reduce it to LDP 2.0, but rather to deliver one building block that can be used to build Solid, which would address some of the issues from the AC reviewers
* HZ: I'm looking at it from the point of view of adoption. Companies are expected to make investement in this new way of building apps. The way the content is deliveered, just looking at LDP, this will take much longer. The companies will less likely invest in adoption if we limit the scope this way.
* PA: I also wanted to respond to Solid not being strictly based on LDP -- that is something that I had missed, and so we would need to address that. There is a tension between bringing Solid as a whole to the W3C as a WG. That seems unlikely at present. Some of the concerns need to be addressed, and one way would be to reduce our ambitions to bring this to a standard track. 

> * AC: It is a very interesting idea, I need to think about it a little bit more. On the high level what I'm hearing is to make the decision, weather we are trying to specify Solid as a whole vs. specify something that would sit underneeth Solid. We can call it LDP 2.0 or something else. If we can build solid on top of that, others could try building something else on top of that. This would provide us a possibility to build solid in a meanigful way. Historically solid comes from LDP, it doesn't have a strict requirement. If LDP would be more clear on some points, and more flexible on other points we could build solid on top of that. If we were to consider something that would be LDP like I would have some ideas where we would like that to go. I like the idea of specifying somehing that solid sits on top of. This way the Solid could be very thin adding only what is missing in that base.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* AC: It is a very interesting idea, I need to think about it a little bit more. On the high level what I'm hearing is to make the decision, whether we are trying to specify Solid as a whole vs. specify something that would sit underneath Solid. We can call it LDP 2.0 or something else. If we can build Solid on top of that, others could try to build something else on top of _that_. This would provide us a possibility to build solid in a meaningful way. Historically, Solid comes from LDP; it doesn't have a strict requirement. If LDP would be more clear on some points, and more flexible on other points, we could build Solid on top of that. If we were to consider something that would be LDP-like, I would have some ideas where we would like that to go. I like the idea of specifying something that Solid sits on top of. This way, the Solid could be very thin, adding only what is missing in that base.
```

> * PA: This is something that has crossed my mind: people could build solid and non-solid things on top of this protocol. "We are solving a problem that is important to the Solid community, but which can also be used elsewhere". The CG could then continue to incubate client-to-client standards. Anchoring the new working group on something existing, such as LDP, would give more standing to this proposal and to continue on the existing path of existing standards. This is a pragmatic tactic. If Solid doesn't need everything on LDP, there may be parts of LDP 1.0 that could be marked deprecated or archaic; or there could be different compliance levels or profiles. Implementations might not be required to implement everything because of the different compliance levels.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* PA: This is something that has crossed my mind: people could build Solid and non-Solid things on top of this protocol. "We are solving a problem that is important to the Solid community, but which solution can also be used elsewhere". The CG could then continue to incubate client-to-client standards. Anchoring the new working group on something existing, such as LDP, would give more standing to this proposal and to continue on the existing path of existing standards. This is a pragmatic tactic. If Solid doesn't need everything of LDP, there may be parts of LDP 1.0 that could be marked deprecated or archaic; or there could be different compliance levels or profiles. Implementations might not be required to implement everything because of the different compliance levels.
```

> * eP: By rethinking our approach, this may be best for Solid. In yesterday's special topic meeting, we discussed how Solid needs to be able to evolve (e.g. 2.0, 3.0...). Several years ago, we need a path for introducing and sunsetting features. There are different ways to keep things explicit and also allow it to evolve. (reactive negotiation, modularity). LDP 2.0 could be a modularization of LDP 1.0. It will be important that, as we think about Solid versions, that we anticipate future versions and have a strategy for this.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* eP: Rethinking our approach, this may be best for Solid. In yesterday's special topic meeting, we discussed how Solid needs to be able to evolve (e.g., 2.0, 3.0, ...). Several years ago, we needed a path for introducing and sunsetting features. There are different ways to keep things explicit and also allow evolution (e.g., reactive negotiation, modularity). LDP 2.0 could be a modularization of LDP 1.0. It will be important, as we think about Solid versions, that we anticipate future versions and have a strategy for this.
```
